The network protocol TCP / IP, a port is a mechanism that allows a computer to support multiple sessions and connections with other computers on the network program. Port can identify applications and services that use network connections on TCP / IP. Thus, the port also identifies a specific process in which a server can provide a service to clients or how a client can access a service that exists in the server. Ports can be identified by a 16-bit number (two bytes) called the Port Number and classified by type of transport protocol to be used, in Port TCP and UDP ports. Because it has a 16-bit number, the total maximum number of ports for any transport protocol used is 65536 pieces.
Judging from numbering, UDP and TCP ports are divided into three types, namely as follows:
- Well-known Port: initially ranged from 0 to 255 but then widened to support a range of 0 to 1023. Port number that belongs to the well-known port, always represents the same network service, and assigned by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority ( IANA). Some of the ports that are within range Well-known port and direservasikan still not been established for use by the services that will be there in the future. Well-known port is defined in RFC 1060.
- Registered Port: Represents the ports used by computer vendors or different networks to support applications and operating systems they create. Registered ports are also known to and registered by IANA allocated but not permanently, so that other vendors can use the same port number. Range registered port range from 1024 to 49 151 and several ports of which are Dynamically Assigned Port.
- Dynamically Assigned Ports: the ports are set by the operating system or application used to serve a request from the user as needed. Dynamically Assigned Port ranged from 1024 to 65536 and may be used or released as needed.

Port Scanning is the activities performed to check the status of TCP and UDP ports on a machine. Many applications offer port facilities to carry out checks on a machine, such as netcat, unicornscan, nmap, etc.
